Blazor WASM perf best practices topic (#18288)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/performance/blazor/webassembly-best-practices.md

## Use System.Text.Json

Blazor's JS interop implementation relies on <xref:System.Text.Json>, which is a high performance JSON serialization library with low memory allocation. Using <xref:System.Text.Json> doesn't result in additional app payload size over adding one or more alternate JSON libraries.

For migration guidance, see [How to migrate from Newtonsoft.Json to System.Text.Json](/dotnet/standard/serialization/system-text-json-migrate-from-newtonsoft-how-to).

## Use synchronous and unmarshalled JS interop APIs where appropriate

Blazor WebAssembly offers two additional versions of <xref:Microsoft.JSInterop.IJSRuntime> over the single version available to Blazor Server apps:

* <xref:Microsoft.JSInterop.IJSInProcessRuntime> allows invoking JS interop calls synchronously, which has less overhead than the asynchronous versions:

  ```razor
  @inject IJSRuntime JS

  @code {
      protected override void OnInitialized()
      {
          var jsInProcess = (IJSInProcessRuntime)JS;

          var value = jsInProcess.Invoke<string>("jsInteropCall");
      }
  }
  ```

> * <xref:Microsoft.JSInterop.WebAssembly.WebAssemblyJSRuntime> permits unmarshalled JS interop calls. While this approach has the least overhead, the JavaScript APIs required to interact with these APIs are currently undocumented and subject to breaking changes in future releases:

Reviewer: It might benefit to put a warning for this (at least until they stabilize these APIs)

By [Pranav Krishnamoorthy](https://github.com/pranavkm)

This article provides guidelines for ASP.NET Core Blazor WebAssembly performance best practices.

## Avoid unnecessary component renders

Blazor's diffing algorithm avoids rerendering a component when the algorithm perceives that the component hasn't changed. Override [ComponentBase.ShouldRender](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase.ShouldRender%2A) for fine-grained control over component rendering.

If authoring a UI-only component that never changes after the initial render, configure `ShouldRender` to return `false`:

```razor
@code {
    protected override bool ShouldRender() => false;
}
```

Also use <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase.ShouldRender%2A> to selectively render a component responding to a UI event.

In the following example:

* <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase.ShouldRender%2A> is overridden and set to the value of the `shouldRender` field, which is initially `false` when the component loads.
* When the button is selected, `shouldRender` is set to `true`, which forces the component to rerender with the updated `currentCount`.

> * Immediately after rerendering, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase.OnAfterRender%2A> sets the value of `shouldRender` back to `false` to prevent further rerendering until the next time the button is selected.

Reviewer 2: @pranavkm I feel like this example is confusing. Because after reading this I've got a natural question whether I should do this myself going forward - as this seem to be very optimal.
We should add an explicit statement saying that this particular example wouldn't need such feel in practice, as the diffing algorithm would get to the same result and that his has been done only for demonstration purposes.

Reviewer: I was shooting for do this if you want fine grained control over when you want to be rendered. Is there a better way to phrase this @mkArtakMSFT  \ @guardrex ?

Author: Maybe dissuade a bit in the lead-in.

Currently, it starts with ...

> Also use `ShouldRender` to selectively render a component responding to a UI event.

... but it could dissuade a bit and say something like ...

> Most apps won't require fine-grained control, but `ShouldRender` can also be used to selectively render a component responding to a UI event.

Author: Yeah ... let's go with that. I'll shoot it in now.

## Use synchronous and unmarshalled JS interop APIs where appropriate

Blazor WebAssembly offers two additional versions of <xref:Microsoft.JSInterop.IJSRuntime> over the single version available to Blazor Server apps:

* <xref:Microsoft.JSInterop.IJSInProcessRuntime> allows invoking JS interop calls synchronously, which has less overhead than the asynchronous versions:

  ```razor
  @inject IJSRuntime JS

  @code {
      protected override void OnInitialized()
      {
          var jsInProcess = (IJSInProcessRuntime)JS;

          var value = jsInProcess.Invoke<string>("jsInteropCall");
      }
  }
  ```

* <xref:Microsoft.JSInterop.WebAssembly.WebAssemblyJSRuntime> permits unmarshalled JS interop calls:

  ```javascript
  function jsInteropCall() {
    return BINDING.js_to_mono_obj("Hello world");
  }
  ```

  ```razor
  @inject IJSRuntime JS

  @code {
      protected override void OnInitialized()
      {
          var jsInProcess = (WebAssemblyJSRuntime)JS;

          var value = jsInProcess.InvokeUnmarshalled<string>("jsInteropCall");
      }
  }
  ```

  > [!WARNING]

>   > While using <xref:Microsoft.JSInterop.WebAssembly.WebAssemblyJSRuntime> has the least overhead of the JS interop approaches, the JavaScript APIs required to interact with these APIs are currently undocumented and subject to breaking changes in future releases.

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering whether this should really be included in the docs. If it's undocumented, we shouldn't promote its usage.

Author: I'll wait for @pranavkm to let me know before merging. ❓ Pull it? Keep it?

Author: Actually ... what I'll do for now is just comment it out. It's too hard to find for the day when it can be live. I'll comment it out in the markup and drop a link to this convo.

Reviewer: There are legitimate scenarios where this is useful. It's public API on Blazor's end, and the performance bump is pretty massive.

Reviewer 2: What's the reason for not documenting that API and being afraid that this may not be there?

Reviewer: They're mono's apis. They haven't had the time to polish it as yet

Reviewer 2: Got it, thanks!

## Reduce app size

### Intermediate Language (IL) linking

> [Linking a Blazor WebAssembly app](xref:host-and-deploy/blazor/configure-linker) reduces the app's size by trimming unused code in the app's binaries. By default, the linker is only enabled when building in `Release` configuration. Publish the app for deployment using the [dotnet publish](/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-publish) command with the [-c|--configuration](/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-publish#options) option set to `Release`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Linking a Blazor WebAssembly app](xref:host-and-deploy/blazor/configure-linker) reduces the app's size by trimming unused code in the app's binaries. By default, the linker is only enabled when building in `Release` configuration. To benefit from this, publish the app for deployment using the [dotnet publish](/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-publish) command with the [-c|--configuration](/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-publish#options) option set to `Release`:
```

```dotnetcli
dotnet publish -c Release
```

### Disable unused features

Blazor WebAssembly's runtime includes the following .NET features that can be disabled if the app doesn't require them for a smaller payload size:

* A data file is included to make timezone information correct. If the app doesn't require this feature, consider disabling it by setting the `BlazorEnableTimeZoneSupport` MSBuild property in the app's project file to `false`:

  ```xml
  <PropertyGroup>
    <BlazorEnableTimeZoneSupport>false</BlazorEnableTimeZoneSupport>
  </PropertyGroup>
  ```

> * Collation information is included to make APIs such as <xref:System.StringComparison.InvariantCultureIgnoreCase&displayProperty=nameWithType> work correctly. If you can verify that the app doesn't require the collation data, consider disabling it by setting the `BlazorWebAssemblyPreserveCollationData` MSBuild property in the app's project file to `false`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Collation information is included to make APIs such as <xref:System.StringComparison.InvariantCultureIgnoreCase&displayProperty=nameWithType> work correctly. If you are certain, that the app doesn't require the collation data, consider disabling it by setting the `BlazorWebAssemblyPreserveCollationData` MSBuild property in the app's project file to `false`:
```

    {
        currentCount++;
        shouldRender = true;
    }
}
```

For more information, see <xref:blazor/lifecycle#after-component-render>.

## Virtualize re-usable fragments

Components offer a convenient approach to produce re-usable fragments of code and markup. In general, we recommend authoring individual components that best align with the app's requirements. One caveat is that each additional child component contributes to the total time it takes to render a parent component. For most apps, the additional overhead is negligible. Apps that produce a large number of components should consider using strategies to reduce processing overhead, such as limiting the number of rendered components.

For example, a grid or list that renders hundreds of rows containing components is processor intensive to render. Consider virtualizing a grid or list layout so that only a subset of the components is rendered at any given time. For an example of component subset rendering, see the following components in the [Virtualization sample app (aspnet/samples GitHub repository)](https://github.com/aspnet/samples/tree/master/samples/aspnetcore/blazor/Virtualization):

> * `Virtualize` component ([Shared/Virtualize.razor](https://github.com/aspnet/samples/blob/master/samples/aspnetcore/blazor/Virtualization/Shared/Virtualize.cs)) &ndash; A component written in C# that implements <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase> to render a set of weather data rows based on user scrolling.

Reviewer 3: Per the style guide, "Don’t use spaces on either side of an en dash."

```suggestion
* `Virtualize` component ([Shared/Virtualize.razor](https://github.com/aspnet/samples/blob/master/samples/aspnetcore/blazor/Virtualization/Shared/Virtualize.cs))&ndash;A component written in C# that implements <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase> to render a set of weather data rows based on user scrolling.
```

Author: That's if the en-dash is used as a connector. Here, it's used as a layout element. Do you prefer a colon-space construct?

Author: I'll change to the colon-space construct.

> * `FetchData` component ([Pages/FetchData.razor](https://github.com/aspnet/samples/blob/master/samples/aspnetcore/blazor/Virtualization/Pages/FetchData.razor)) &ndash; Uses the `Virtualize` component to display 25 rows of weather data at a time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `FetchData` component ([Pages/FetchData.razor](https://github.com/aspnet/samples/blob/master/samples/aspnetcore/blazor/Virtualization/Pages/FetchData.razor))&ndash;Uses the `Virtualize` component to display 25 rows of weather data at a time.
```

## Avoid JavaScript interop to marshal data

> In Blazor WebAssembly, a JS interop call must traverse the WebAssembly-JS boundary. Serializing and deserializing content across the two contexts creates processing overhead for the app. Frequent JS interop calls often adversely affects performance. To reduce the marshalling of data across the boundary, determine if the app can consolidate many small payloads into a single large payload to avoid the high volume of context switching between WebAssembly and JS.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Blazor WebAssembly, a JavaScript (JS) interop call must traverse the WebAssembly-JS boundary. Serializing and deserializing content across the two contexts creates processing overhead for the app. Frequent JS interop calls often adversely affects performance. To reduce the marshalling of data across the boundary, determine if the app can consolidate many small payloads into a single large payload to avoid the high volume of context switching between WebAssembly and JS.
```

## Use System.Text.Json

> Blazor's JS interop implementation relies on <xref:System.Text.Json>, which is a high performance JSON serialization library with low memory allocation. Using <xref:System.Text.Json> doesn't result in additional app payload size over adding one or more alternate JSON libraries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Blazor's JS interop implementation relies on <xref:System.Text.Json>, which is a high-performance JSON serialization library with low memory allocation. Using <xref:System.Text.Json> doesn't result in additional app payload size over adding one or more alternate JSON libraries.
```

## Reduce app size

### Intermediate Language (IL) linking

[Linking a Blazor WebAssembly app](xref:host-and-deploy/blazor/configure-linker) reduces the app's size by trimming unused code in the app's binaries. By default, the linker is only enabled when building in `Release` configuration. Publish the app for deployment using the [dotnet publish](/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-publish) command with the [-c|--configuration](/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-publish#options) option set to `Release`:

```dotnetcli
dotnet publish -c Release
```

### Disable unused features

Blazor WebAssembly's runtime includes the following .NET features that can be disabled if the app doesn't require them for a smaller payload size:

* A data file is included to make timezone information correct. If the app doesn't require this feature, consider disabling it by setting the `BlazorEnableTimeZoneSupport` MSBuild property in the app's project file to `false`:

  ```xml
  <PropertyGroup>
    <BlazorEnableTimeZoneSupport>false</BlazorEnableTimeZoneSupport>
  </PropertyGroup>
  ```

> * Collation information is included to make APIs such as [StringComparison.InvariantCultureIgnoreCase](xref:System.StringComparison.InvariantCultureIgnoreCase) work correctly. If you can verify that the app doesn't require the collation data, consider disabling it by setting the `BlazorWebAssemblyPreserveCollationData` MSBuild property in the app's project file to `false`:

Reviewer 3: Consider using the xref style of link for the API link.

Author: Pranav wants "StringComparison" to appear (but not the full namespace, `?displayProperty=fullName`).

Reviewer 3: You should be able to use the following syntax:

<xref:System.StringComparison.InvariantCultureIgnoreCase&displayProperty=nameWithType>

  ```xml
  <PropertyGroup>

>     <BlazorWebAssemblyPreserveCollationData>

Reviewer 3: I assume you added the line breaks to avoid horizontal scrolling in the doc. If possible, remove those line breaks. This sample looks odd.

Author: I did ... and I agree. 😁
